# Literals

Consider the following two statements:

```cpp
std::cout << "Hello world!";
int x{ 5 };
```



What are *“Hello world!”* and *5*? They are literals. A **literal** (also known as a **literal constant**) is a fixed value that has been inserted directly into the source code.

Literals and variables both have a value (and a type). However, the value of a literal is fixed and can’t be changed (hence it being called a constant), whereas the value of a variable can be changed through initialization and assignment.

# Operators

In mathematics, an **operation** is a mathematical calculation involving zero or more input values (called **operands**) that produces a new value (called an output value). The specific operation to be performed is denoted by a construct (typically a symbol or pair of symbols) called an **operator**.

For example, as children we all learn that *2 + 3* equals *5*. In this case, the literals *2* and *3* are the operands, and the symbol *+* is the operator that tells us to apply mathematical addition on the operands to produce the new value *5*.

> **Author’s note**
>
> For reasons that will become clear when we discuss operators in more detail, for operators that are symbols, it is common nomenclature to append the operator’s symbol to the word *operator*.
>
> For example, the plus operator would be written *operator+*, and the extraction operator would be written *operator>>*.

You are likely already quite familiar with standard arithmetic operators from common usage in mathematics, including addition (+), subtraction (-), multiplication (*), and division (/). In C++, assignment (=) is an operator as well, as are <<; (insertion), >> (extraction), and == (equality). While most operators have symbols for names (e.g. +, or ==), there are also a number of operators that are words (e.g. new, delete, and throw).

The number of operands that an operator takes as input is called the operator’s *arity* (almost nobody knows what this word means, so don’t drop it in a conversation and expect anybody to have any idea what you’re talking about). Operators in C++ come in four different *arities*:

**Unary** operators act on one operand. An example of a unary operator is the *- operator*. For example, given `-5`, *operator-* takes literal operand *5* and flips its sign to produce new output value *-5*.

**Binary** operators act on two operands (known as *left* and *right*). An example of a binary operator is the *+ operator*. For example, given `3 + 4`, *operator+* takes the left operand (3) and the right operand (4) and applies mathematical addition to produce new output value *7*. The insertion (<<) and extraction (>>) operators are binary operators, taking std::cout or std::cin on the left side, and the value to output or variable to input to on the right side.

**Ternary** operators act on three operands. There is only one of these in C++ (the conditional operator), which we’ll cover later.

**Nullary** operators act on zero operands. There is also only one of these in C++ (the throw operator), which we’ll also cover later.

Note that some operators have more than one meaning depending on how they are used. For example, *operator-* has two contexts. It can be used in unary form to invert a number’s sign (e.g. to convert 5 to -5, or vice versa), or it can be used in binary form to do subtraction (e.g. 4 - 3).

# Chaining operators

Operators can be chained together such that the output of one operator can be used as the input for another operator. For example, given the following: *2 \* 3 + 4*, the multiplication operator goes first, and converts left operand *2* and right operand *3* into new value *6* (which becomes the left operand for the plus operator). Next, the plus operator executes, and converts left operand *6* and right operand *4* into new value 10.

We’ll talk more about the order in which operators execute when we do a deep dive into the topic of operators. For now, it’s enough to know that the arithmetic operators execute in the same order as they do in standard mathematics: Parenthesis first, then Exponents, then Multiplication & Division, then Addition & Subtraction. This ordering is sometimes abbreviated *PEMDAS*, or expanded to the mnemonic “Please Excuse My Dear Aunt Sally”.

> **Author’s note**
>
> In some countries, PEMDAS is taught as PEDMAS, BEDMAS, BODMAS, or BIDMAS instead.

