# Words of encouragement

Congratulations on reaching the end of the longest chapter in the tutorials! Unless you have previous programming experience, this chapter was probably the most challenging one so far. If you made it this far, you’re doing great!

The good news is that the next chapter is easy in comparison. And in the chapter beyond that, we reach the heart of the tutorials: Object-oriented programming!

# Chapter summary

Arrays allow us to store and access many variables of the same type through a single identifier. Array elements can be accessed using the subscript operator (`[]`). Be careful not to index an array out of the array’s range. Arrays can be initialized using an initializer list or uniform initialization.

Fixed arrays must have a length that is set at compile time. Fixed arrays will usually decay into a pointer when evaluated or passed to a function.

Loops can be used to iterate through an array. Beware of off-by-one errors, so you don’t iterate off the end of your array. Range-based for-loops are useful when the array hasn’t decayed into a pointer.



Arrays can be made multidimensional by using multiple indices.

Arrays can be used to do C-style strings. You should generally avoid these and use `std::string_view` and `std::string` instead.

Pointers are variables that store the memory address of (point at) another variable. The address-of operator (`&`) can be used to get the address of a variable. The indirection operator (`*`) can be used to get the value that a pointer points at.

A null pointer is a pointer that is not pointing at anything. Pointers can be made null by initializing or assigning the value `nullptr` to them. Avoid the `NULL` macro. Indirection through a null pointer can cause bad things to happen. Deleting a null pointer is okay (it doesn’t do anything).

A pointer to an array doesn’t know how large the array it is pointing to is. This means `sizeof()` and range-based for-loops won’t work.

The `new` and `delete` operators can be used to dynamically allocate memory for a pointer variable or array. Although it’s unlikely to happen, operator `new` can fail if the operating system runs out of memory. If you’re writing software for a memory-limited system, make sure to check if `new` was successful.

Make sure to use the array delete (`delete[]`) when deleting an array. Pointers pointing to deallocated memory are called dangling pointers. Using the wrong `delete`, or indirection through a dangling pointer causes undefined behavior.

Failing to delete dynamically allocated memory can result in memory leaks when the last pointer to that memory goes out of scope.

Normal variables are allocated from limited memory called the stack. Dynamically allocated variables are allocated from a general pool of memory called the heap.

A pointer to a `const` value treats the value it is pointing to as `const`.

```cpp
int value{ 5 };
const int* ptr{ &value }; // this is okay, ptr is pointing to a "const int"
```

COPY

A `const` pointer is a pointer whose value can not be changed after initialization.

```cpp
int value{ 5 };
int* const ptr{ &value }; // ptr is const, but *ptr is non-const
```

COPY

A reference is an alias to another variable. References are declared using an ampersand (`&`), but this does not mean address-of in this context. References are implicitly `const` -- they must be initialized with a value, and a new value can not be assigned to them. References can be used to prevent copies from being made when passing data to or from a function.

The member selection operator (`->`) can be used to select a member from a pointer to a struct. It combines both an indirection and normal member access (`.`).

Void pointers are pointers that can point to any type of data. Indirection through them is not possible directly. You can use `static_cast` to convert them back to their original pointer type. It’s up to you to remember what type they originally were.

Pointers to pointers allow us to create a pointer that points to another pointer.

`std::array` provides all of the functionality of C++ built-in arrays (and more) in a form that won’t decay into a pointer. These should generally be preferred over built-in fixed arrays.

`std::vector` provides dynamic array functionality, handles its own memory management and remembers its size. These should generally be favored over built-in dynamic arrays.

Thanks to iterators, we don’t have to know how a container is implemented to loop through its elements.

The algorithms library helps us to save a lot of time by providing many off-the-shelf functions. In combination with iterators (and later lambdas), the algorithms library is an important part of C++.

# Quiz time

To make the quizzes a little easier, we have to introduce a couple of new algorithms.

[`std::reduce`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/algorithm/reduce) applies a function, by default the `+` operator, to all elements in a list, resulting in a single value. When we use the `+` operator, the result is the sum of all elements in the list. Note that there’s also [`std::accumulate`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/algorithm/accumulate). `std::accumulate` cannot be parallelized, because it applies the function left-to-right. `std::reduce` segments the list, which means that the function is applied in an unknown order, allowing the operation to be parallelized. If we want to sum up a list, we don’t care about the order and we use `std::reduce`.

> **Author’s note**
>
> `std::reduce` is currently not fully implemented in all major standard libraries. If it doesn’t work for you, fall back to `std::accumulate`.

[`std::shuffle`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/algorithm/random_shuffle) takes a list and randomly re-orders its elements. We covered `std::mt19937` in lesson [7.19 -- Generating random numbers using Mersenne Twister](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/generating-random-numbers-using-mersenne-twister/).

```cpp
#include <algorithm> // std::shuffle
#include <array>
#include <ctime>
#include <iostream>
#include <numeric> // std::reduce
#include <random>

int main()
{
  std::array arr{ 1, 2, 3, 4 };

  std::cout << std::reduce(arr.begin(), arr.end()) << '\n'; // 10

  // If you can't use std::reduce, use std::accumulate. The 0 is the initial value
  // of the result: (((0 + 1) + 2) + 3) + 4
  std::cout << std::accumulate(arr.begin(), arr.end(), 0) << '\n'; // 10

  std::mt19937 mt{ static_cast<std::mt19937::result_type>(std::time(nullptr)) };
  std::shuffle(arr.begin(), arr.end(), mt);

  for (int i : arr)
  {
    std::cout << i << ' ';
  }

  std::cout << '\n';

  return 0;
}
```

