# Chapter Review

The smallest unit of memory is a **binary digit**, also called a **bit**. The smallest unit amount of memory that can be addressed directly is a **byte**. The modern standard is that a byte equals 8 bits.

A **data type** tells the compiler how to interpret the contents of memory in some meaningful way.

C++ comes with support for many fundamental data types, including floating point numbers, integers, boolean, chars, null pointers, and void.

==**Void** is used to indicate no type. It is primarily used to indicate that a function does not return a value.==

Different types take different amounts of memory, and the amount of memory used may vary by machine. See [4.3 -- Object sizes and the sizeof operator](https://www.learncpp.com/cpp-tutorial/object-sizes-and-the-sizeof-operator/) for a table indicating the minimum size for each fundamental type.



The **sizeof** operator can be used to return the size of a type in bytes.

**Signed integers** are used for holding positive and negative whole numbers, including 0. The set of values that a specific data type can hold is called its **range**. When using integers, keep an eye out for overflow and integer division problems.

**Unsigned integers** only hold positive numbers, and should generally be avoided unless you’re doing bit-level manipulation.

**Fixed-width integers** are integers with guaranteed sizes, but they may not exist on all architectures. The fast and least integers are the fastest and smallest integers that are at least some size. std::int8_t and std::uint8_t should generally be avoided, as they tend to behave like chars instead of integers.

**size_t** is an unsigned integral type that is used to represent the size or length of objects.

**Scientific notation** is a shorthand way of writing lengthy numbers. C++ supports scientific notation in conjunction with floating point numbers. The digits in the significand (the part before the e) are called the **significant digits**.

**Floating point** is a set of types designed to hold real numbers (including those with a fractional component). The **precision** of a number defines how many significant digits it can represent without information loss. A **rounding error** can occur when too many significant digits are stored in a floating point number that can’t hold that much precision. Rounding errors happen all the time, even with simple numbers such as 0.1. Because of this, you shouldn’t compare floating point numbers directly.

The **boolean** type is used to store a true or false value.

**If statements** allow us to execute one or more lines of code if some condition is true. The conditional expression of an *if statement* is interpreted as a boolean value.

**Char** is used to store values that are interpreted as an ASCII character. When using chars, be careful not to mix up ASCII code values and numbers. Printing a char as an integer value requires use of static_cast.



Angled brackets are typically used in C++ to represent something that needs a parameterizable type. This is used with static_cast to determine what data type the argument should be converted to (e.g. `static_cast<int>(x)` will convert *x* to an int).

A **constant** is a value that may not be changed. C++ supports two types of constants: const variables, and literals. A variables whose value can not be changed is called a **constant variable**. The **const** keyword is used to make a variable constant.

A **symbolic constant** is a name given to a constant value. Constant variables are one type of symbolic constant, as are object-like macros with substitution text.

A **constant expression** is an expression that can be evaluated at compile-time. A **compile-time constant** is a constant whose value is known at compile-time. A **runtime constant** is a constant whose initialization value isn’t known until runtime. A **constexpr** variable must be a compile-time constant.

**Literals** are values inserted directly into the code. Literals have types, and literal suffixes can be used to change the type of a literal from the default type.

A **magic number** is a literal (usually a number) that either has an unclear meaning or may need to be changed later. Don’t use magic numbers in your code. Instead, use symbolic constants.

In everyday life, we count using **decimal** numbers, which have 10 digits. Computers use **binary**, which only has 2 digits. C++ also supports **octal** (base 8) and **hexadecimal** (base 16). These are all examples of **numeral systems**, which are collections of symbols (digits) used to represent numbers.

A **string** is a collection of sequential characters that is used to represent text (such as names, words, and sentences). String literals are always placed between double quotes. String literals in C++ are C-style strings, which have a strange type that is hard to work with.

**std::string** offers an easy and safe way to deal with text strings. std::string lives in the <string> header. `std::string` is expensive to initialize and copy.

**std::string_view** provides read-only access to an existing string (a C-style string literal, a std::string, or a char array) without making a copy.