# Incrementing and decrementing variables

Incrementing (adding 1 to) and decrementing (subtracting 1 from) a variable are both so common that they have their own operators.







| Operator                           | Symbol | Form | Operation                                      |
| :--------------------------------- | :----- | :--- | :--------------------------------------------- |
| Prefix increment (pre-increment)   | ++     | ++x  | Increment x, then return x                     |
| Prefix decrement (pre-decrement)   | ––     | ––x  | Decrement x, then return x                     |
| Postfix increment (post-increment) | ++     | x++  | Copy x, then increment x, then return the copy |
| Postfix decrement (post-decrement) | ––     | x––  | Copy x, then decrement x, then return the copy |

Note that there are two versions of each operator -- a prefix version (where the operator comes before the operand) and a postfix version (where the operator comes after the operand).

The prefix increment/decrement operators are very straightforward. First, the operand is incremented or decremented, and then expression evaluates to the value of the operand. For example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    int x { 5 };
    int y = ++x; // x is incremented to 6, x is evaluated to the value 6, and 6 is assigned to y

    std::cout << x << ' ' << y << '\n';
    return 0;
}
```

COPY

This prints:

```
6 6
```

The postfix increment/decrement operators are trickier. First, a copy of the operand is made. Then the operand (not the copy) is incremented or decremented. Finally, the copy (not the original) is evaluated. For example:



```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    int x { 5 };
    int y = x++; // x is incremented to 6, copy of original x is evaluated to the value 5, and 5 is assigned to y

    std::cout << x << ' ' << y << '\n';
    return 0;
}
```

COPY

This prints:

```
6 5
```

Let’s examine how this line 6 works in more detail. First, a temporary copy of *x* is made that starts with the same value as *x* (5). Then the actual *x* is incremented from *5* to *6*. Then the copy of *x* (which still has value *5*) is returned and assigned to *y*. Then the temporary copy is discarded.

Consequently, *y* ends up with the value of *5* (the pre-incremented value), and *x* ends up with the value *6* (the post-incremented value).

Note that the postfix version takes a lot more steps, and thus may not be as performant as the prefix version.

Here is another example showing the difference between the prefix and postfix versions:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main()
{
    int x{ 5 };
    int y{ 5 };
    std::cout << x << ' ' << y << '\n';
    std::cout << ++x << ' ' << --y << '\n'; // prefix
    std::cout << x << ' ' << y << '\n';
    std::cout << x++ << ' ' << y-- << '\n'; // postfix
    std::cout << x << ' ' << y << '\n';

    return 0;
}
```

COPY

This produces the output:

```
5 5
6 4
6 4
6 4
7 3
```

On the 8th line, we do a prefix increment and decrement. On this line, *x* and *y* are incremented/decremented *before* their values are sent to std::cout, so we see their updated values reflected by std::cout.

On the 10th line, we do a postfix increment and decrement. On this line, the copy of *x* and *y* (with the pre-incremented and pre-decremented values) are what is sent to std::cout, so we don’t see the increment and decrement reflected here. Those changes don’t show up until the next line, when *x* and *y* are evaluated again.

> **Best practice**
>
> Strongly favor the prefix version of the increment and decrement operators, as they are generally more performant, and you’re less likely to run into strange issues with them.

# Side effects

A function or expression is said to have a **side effect** if it does anything that persists beyond the life of the function or expression itself.

Common examples of side effects include changing the value of objects, doing input or output, or updating a graphical user interface (e.g. enabling or disabling a button).



Most of the time, side effects are useful:

```cpp
x = 5; // the assignment operator modifies the state of x
++x; // operator++ modifies the state of x
std::cout << x; // operator<< modifies the state of the console
```

COPY

The assignment operator in the above example has the side effect of changing the value of *x* permanently. Even after the statement has finished executing, *x* will still have the value 5. Similarly with operator++, the value of *x* is altered even after the statement has finished evaluating. The outputting of *x* also has the side effect of modifying the state of the console, as you can now see the value of *x* printed to the console.

However, side effects can also lead to unexpected results:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int add(int x, int y)
{
    return x + y;
}

int main()
{
    int x{ 5 };
    int value{ add(x, ++x) }; // is this 5 + 6, or 6 + 6?
    // It depends on what order your compiler evaluates the function arguments in

    std::cout << value << '\n'; // value could be 11 or 12, depending on how the above line evaluates!
    return 0;
}
```

COPY

The C++ standard does not define the order in which function arguments are evaluated. If the left argument is evaluated first, this becomes a call to add(5, 6), which equals 11. If the right argument is evaluated first, this becomes a call to add(6, 6), which equals 12! Note that this is only a problem because one of the arguments to function add() has a side effect.

> **As an aside…**
>
> The C++ standard intentionally does not define these things so that compilers can do whatever is most natural (and thus most performant) for a given architecture.

There are other cases where the C++ standard does not specify the order in which certain things are evaluated (such as operator operands), so different compilers may exhibit different behaviors. Even when the C++ standard does make it clear how things should be evaluated, historically this has been an area where there have been many compiler bugs. These problems can generally *all* be avoided by ensuring that any variable that has a side-effect applied is used no more than once in a given statement.



> ==**Warning**==
>
> ==C++ does not define the order of evaluation for function arguments or operator operands.==

> **Warning**
>
> Don’t use a variable that has a side effect applied to it more than once in a given statement. If you do, the result may be undefined.